# Finding our life career path as a teenagers

by Diana Štěpničková


I was fourteen when my career path began. I had to pick a high school that would set me on the right path to getting my dream job. Dream jobs however weren't on my mind. Freed from the kids' elementary school all I wanted was to meet new people and socialize. My career will be handled when I get there. So it happened that the "There will always be constructions in the future" argument was enough for me to join construction high school. I was also going to be one of the only two girls in the classroom, so I had that "changing stereotypes" and "fighting the patriarchy" spirit going for me. 

Soon I found out that all the other guys and the girl have construction experience or interests hence why they joined the school. I myself was wondering why the ceiling is hanging in there and not falling. That was unfortunately the only thing that interested me about houses and after I found that one out there was no interest left. We got a teacher who would read building construction repair methods to us for hours and another one who was vivid when we didn't understand her constructive geometry lecture. Then we had a teacher who would simply tell us to make a house project and left to work on his own projects. The only class I felt like I belong to was our technical writing atelier. Here we could draw. Not our own pictures, but we were redrawing designs of famous architects and even learning some calligraphy. The years went past and then we were graduating. All my teachers knew by then, that I don't belong in the field. My house project was a disaster and they let me pass with the lowest grade. I also had to promise the board that I will not pursue a career in construction or try to get any higher education in the field.

It was college time. With the construction career out of the way, I had to find another path. Fresh start. I could almost see the happy ending here. But this time I had an IT industry in mind. Just like construction - an industry with a future and not a lot of women in it. So I moved to Jihlava to study applied informatics and repeated the exact same mistake. This time I realized much sooner. I couldn't even go through the first week. Not only I was the only girl this time, but most of the other guys already studied applied informatics in high school for 4 years. All the teachers were building right on that. They needed me to understand the processor unit in the first class but all I could give them was the roof truss composition breakdown. So I left and gave up on school. After my history with the education system, my parents didn't have much hope for me being able to finish college so they didn't pressure me to study further. 

I was free to be a grownup. I also failed terribly in choosing the career path for myself. And I still didn't care. I wanted to see the world. With my future husband, we traveled and worked as seasonal workers around Europe and in New Zealand. We ended up on a small Portuguese goat farm for a few months run by a single man in his forties - Dave, who offered us food and shelter in exchange for our work. After the first month, I got pretty decent at shepherding the goats and learned how to stand my ground with the male goat. Instead of letting them out into the coop, I could take them out for a hike in to the mountains where there was tons of food. There was also a lot of fun for me due to the "scared woman" scream the goats are making when they don't see the herd. For lunch, we would eat fresh sardines and share stories with Dave and in the afternoon we would ride the single bike with my husband down the mountain to the nearest beach. It was here where I realized that I don't want to spend my life in the office. The farm wasn't how Dave made his living. For him to be able to live in the mountains he had to work as a freelance developer. And finally at this moment while handing a fresh bamboo to a goat I made my first actual career decision. Whatever I do it has to be remote. With my husband slowly becoming a developer himself the conversation soon stirred to graphic designers. People are apparently willing to pay you to make their website beautiful. I was always a very visual person and I loved the idea of being paid for something creative. The more I looked into it the more I wanted to become a designer. 

I finally knew what my dream job is. With my faith in our educational system lost I set myself to become a self-taught graphic designer. I took a crash course in Adobe programs and started designing. Many business owners are unaware of the influence graphic design can have on a brand and therefore aren’t willing to pay for a proper designer. Thanks to them I got my first design jobs pretty fast with zero experience. But it wasn't enough to make a living. I realized that freelancing is the end of the path, not the beginning. I needed more experience so I decided to get a job in a printing studio. I was getting better in the Adobe programs every day and learned a lot about print. After a year the learning curve dropped rapidly. I wasn't learning anymore. I was stuck in my work routine and I still didn't felt as a designer. I had big gaps in my knowladge and I saw only one way how to change that. 

Once again it was college time. But this time I wasn't looking for schools so I could be college graduate. I was searching for school that will make me into a graphic designer. I had put my best pieces together, created a portfolio, applied to VŠKK, and got accepted. Since I joined I have been becoming better designer every day.





